.TH VDR-RECTOOLS 1 "May 2026" "vdr-rectools" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vdr-rectools \- Suite for managing, repairing and converting VDR recordings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vdr-rectools
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARGUMENT\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vdr-rectools
is a modular, fully automated Bash suite for the Video Disk Recorder (VDR). It is used for managing, repairing, converting and seamlessly integrating VDR recordings and external video files into media centers like Plex or Kodi.
.P
The main functions include intelligent import of video files (MKV, MP4 etc.), a two-stage repair of broken recordings, conversion to space-saving formats (H.265/HEVC) and the automatic generation of metadata and symlinks for external media players.
.SH COMMANDS
The following commands can be executed directly in the terminal:
.TP
.B start
Starts a full scan (import & cleanup) in the background.
.TP
.B import
Starts only the import process for files in the configured import directory.
.TP
.B repair
Starts a repair run for all existing VDR recordings.
.TP
.B status
Shows the process ID (PID), runtime, and the latest log entries of a running process.
.TP
.B stop
Stops running background processes cleanly.
.TP
.B osd-status
Shows an OSD-optimized status (for VDR menus).
.TP
.B diag
Shows system diagnostic information (hardware accelerators, encoders).
.TP
.B confirm
Confirms or rejects a pending re-encode (incl. restore option).
.TP
.B osd-confirm \fI<yes|no|manual>\fR
Confirms, rejects, or delegates a pending re-encode via OSD.
.TP
.B cron
Simulates the nightly timer call and checks if automation is enabled in the configuration.
.TP
.B repair_single \fI<Path to .rec>\fR
Repairs a single recording specifically.
.TP
.B pes2ts
Recursively searches the VDR video directory for outdated PES recordings (*.vdr) and safely converts them to the modern TS format via an atomic swap. Metadata, VDR cut marks, and DVB subtitles are preserved.
.TP
.B pes2ts_single \fI<Path to .rec>\fR
Specifically converts a single PES recording (specifying the absolute path to the .rec directory) to the TS format.
.TP
.B check_single \fI<Path to .rec>\fR
Checks the recording in the specified directory for stream errors without modifying it. The result is written to the log file.
.SH IMPORT-WORKFLOW
The import process is the core of
.B vdr-rectools
. When a video file is found in the import directory, the script performs an intelligent analysis of the video codec and chooses the appropriate strategy:
.IP "1. \fBCompatible Formats (h264, hevc, mpeg2video)\fR"
The file is repackaged into a VDR-compatible transport stream container without quality loss and very quickly (Remuxing).
.IP "2. \fBWeb Formats (vp8, vp9, av1)\fR"
The file is transcoded into the modern and space-saving H.265 (HEVC) format.
.IP "3. \fBMiniDV Format (dvvideo)\fR"
The file is transcoded to H.264 using a deinterlace filter (yadif) to remove image artifacts.
.IP "4. \fBOther/Unknown Formats\fR"
As a fallback, the file is transcoded to H.264 to ensure compatibility.
.P
This automatic transcoding process can be disabled via the configuration file to prevent CPU-intensive operations on low-power systems.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration is done via the file
.BR /etc/vdr/conf.d/vdr-rectools.conf .
The most important variables are:
.TP
.B AUTO_START_NIGHT
Enables the nightly automatic scan (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 0.
.TP
.B AUTO_TIMER
General switch for timer-based actions. Default: 0.
.TP
.B IMPORT_DIR
Directory to scan for video files to import.
.TP
.B VDR_HOOK_DIR
Path to the VDR shutdown-hooks directory. Default: /etc/vdr/shutdown-hooks.
.TP
.B AUTO_ENCODE_IMPORT
Enables automatic re-encoding during import if an incompatible codec is detected (1=On, 0=Off). If 0, the import is rejected. Default: 1.
.TP
.B ASK_BEFORE_ENCODE
Ask via dashboard/mail before starting a re-encode (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 1.
.TP
.B HTML_DASHBOARD
Exports live status to an HTML page (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 0.
.TP
.B HTML_PATH
Path to save the Web Dashboard. Default: /var/www/html/rectools.html.
.TP
.B LANGUAGE
Language for the Web Dashboard (de, en, es, fr, it, pl, pt). Default: de.
.TP
.B CRF_H264_DEFAULT
Constant Rate Factor (CRF) for H.264 encoding. A lower value means better quality but larger file size. Default: 23.
.TP
.B PRESET_H264_DEFAULT
Preset for H.264 encoding (e.g., `medium`, `fast`, `slow`). Affects speed and efficiency. Default: `medium`.
.TP
.B CRF_H265_DEFAULT
CRF for H.265 encoding. Default: 23.
.TP
.B PRESET_H265_DEFAULT
Preset for H.265 encoding. Default: `medium`.
.TP
.B HW_ACCEL
Hardware acceleration (none, nvenc, vaapi, qsv). Default: none.
.TP
.B SHRINK_MAX_RES
Maximum resolution (height) for shrink. 0=disabled. Default: 0.
.TP
.B CRF_H264_FALLBACK
CRF for fallback encoding. Default: 23.
.TP
.B PRESET_H264_FALLBACK
Preset for fallback encoding. Default: `fast`.
.TP
.B MIN_COMPRESSION_RATIO_H264
Max file size in % of original for H.264 encodes. Default: 70.
.TP
.B MIN_COMPRESSION_RATIO_H265
Max file size in % of original for H.265 encodes. Default: 50.
.TP
.B MIN_COMPRESSION_RATIO_H264_FALLBACK
Max file size in % of original for H.264 fallback encodes. Default: 70.
.TP
.B AUTO_SUB_DOWNLOAD
Enables automatic download of subtitles via Subliminal (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 1.
.TP
.B SUB_LANG
Preferred language for subtitles (e.g., de, en). Default: "de".
.TP
.B AUDIO_NORMALIZE
Audio downmix (stereo) & dialog normalization (Night-Mode). (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 0.
.TP
.B MAIL_NOTIFY
E-mail address for status and error reports. If empty, no mails are sent.
.TP
.B TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN
API Token for your Telegram Bot (for push notifications).
.TP
.B TELEGRAM_CHAT_ID
Your personal Telegram Chat ID.
.TP
.B MIN_FREE_GB
Minimum free disk space (in GB) on the video drive. Undercutting leads to abort. Default: 20.
.TP
.B MAX_FILESIZE_GB
Skips imports above this file size in GB (0=disabled). Default: 0.
.TP
.B MAX_FILES
Maximum number of files per run. Default: 10.
.TP
.B PAUSE_WORK
Pause between work steps (seconds). Default: 30.
.TP
.B PAUSE_CHECK
Pause between file checks (seconds). Default: 2.
.TP
.B USE_TVSCRAPER
Enables integration with the VDR tvscraper plugin (1=On, 0=Off). Default: 0.
.TP
.B TVSCRAPER_MODE
Sets the mode for the scrape ("immediate" for now, "batch" for the next nightly run). Default: "immediate".
.TP
.B SNAPSHOT_TIME
Timestamp (HH:MM:SS) for the generation of preview images. Default: "00:05:00".
.SH VDR OSD-INTEGRATION
The package automatically installs commands in the VDR recording menu (`reccmds.conf`) which can be accessed via the remote control:
.IP "• \fBRepair recording (Rectools)\fR"
.IP "• \fBCut commercials (Rectools)\fR"
.IP "• \fBSave space H.265 (Rectools)\fR"
.IP "• \fBPlex/Kodi Sync (Rectools)\fR"
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/vdr/conf.d/vdr-rectools.conf
Main configuration file.
.TP
.B /var/log/vdr-rectools.log
Log file in which all operations are logged in detail.
.TP
.B /usr/share/vdr-rectools/
Directory containing the core scripts (functions.sh, media_tools.sh).
.TP
.B /etc/vdr/reccmds.conf
Configuration file for the VDR command menu.
.TP
.B /lib/systemd/system/vdr-rectools.timer
Systemd timer for automatic, nightly execution.
.TP
.B /usr/share/man/man1/vdr-rectools.1.gz
This manpage.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All actions, decisions of the import switch and errors are written to the log file
.B /var/log/vdr-rectools.log
. This is the primary source for troubleshooting. If email dispatch is configured, critical errors and a summary of the run are delivered by mail.
.SH AUTHOR
Holger Schvestka <hotzenplotz5@gmx.de>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vdr (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR systemctl (1)